:showtitle:
:toc: left
:numbered:
:icons: font
:state: draft
:revremark: State: {state}
:authors: Robert Mustacchi <rm@fingolfin.org>
:sponsor:

= IPD 49 Advancing the C Standard in illumos
{authors}

[cols="3"]
|===
|Authors: {author}
|Sponsor: {sponsor}
|State: {state}
|===

The current predominant programming language in illumos is C. In the
early days of the illumos code base there was no standard for the C
programming language. In the intervening years the C language has
continued to evolve and advance through the efforts of the C language
working group https://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG14/[WG14]. Much like
https://github.com/illumos/ipd/blob/master/ipd/0007/README.md[IPD 7
illumos GCC Maintenance], this IPD lays out the general guidelines and
policies for how the C standard can be advanced for software we build as
well as the constraints that we have.

In particular this IPD proposes and clarifies:

* Adopting the C17 standard for all new software today.
* Outlines the process by which new C versions can be adopted and
  considered.
* Describes when it's appropriate to change the C standard for software
  and what's expected when doing so.
* Changes to `cw` to reduce surprises.

In addition, this IPD clarifies:

* Cases where we cannot change the C standard and need to be
  circumspect about exposing newer language features.
* The process for adopting new language features for use in illumos-gate.

Critically this IPD does not change:

* Our ability to add header and library support for newer C versions
  than we are using.

== Background

C standardization has gone through several different phases. The C
standard describes:

. The C language itself. This is its grammar, core types, the
pre-processor, and more.
. The C library. This includes the various headers and functions. This
is a major part of where `libc` comes from.
. The environment that C operates in, which includes the notion of the
abstract machine, character sets, and related.

K&R C::

This is C before it was standardized. While there are many features that
have stayed the same, one of the major differences is how functions and
types were declared.

C89::

This was the first major version of C. It was published by ANSI in 1989
and then ISO in 1990. This is sometimes called ANSI C, C89, and C90. It
changed the language in several ways from K&R C and forms the baseline
of the language across the industry.

C99::

This was the second major revision of C. It was published in 1999 by
ISO. This added various features such as flexible array members,
variable declarations that could occur in other locations, and expanded XXX: i assume this is about other locations than directly after the function header? maybe other locations could be a bit more specific
the library substantially.

C11::

This was the third major revision of C. It was published by ISO in 2011.
This added numerous features around atomics, threading support, type
generic expression, anonymous structures and unions, etc.

C17::

This was published in 2017 and did not add new features to the language
or library. It consolidated clarifications and technical corrections.

C23::

This is the most recent version of C. It was finished in 2023 though
published in 2024, though it is called C23. This added several new
language features and concepts ranging from digit separators, function
attributes, bit-specific types, binary notation, and continued the
expansion of the standard library.

In general, the C standard is written such that it is possible for an
operating system like illumos to support all major revisions of the C
standard. Different software expects and operates across these versions
and selects the version that they desire to use with compiler flags.
Most programs use features beyond the C standard which may be part of
the operating system, POSIX, or third-party packages. Software which
only uses features and libraries which are described in the standard are
called "strictly conforming".

Compilers implement support for the different languages versions and
have a default version that they use if nothing is specified on the
command line and a series of flags to select the language. The most
common form of this flag, used across `gcc` and `clang`, is `-std`. In
addition, the compilers often have their own language extensions. Using
gcc as an example, if someone wanted to target C99, strictly conforming
software would use `-std=c99` whereas software that is not strictly
conforming, would use `-std=gnu99`, though this also provides access to
additional language features.

When software opts into strictly conforming mode, this means that unless
something else is specified such as requesting a version of POSIX or the
use of the `__EXTENSIONS__` flag, then we are encouraged to only make
the standard's contents visible in headers defined by the standard. For
example, ISO C defines `<stdio.h>`, so it is something that we have to
play symbol visibility games in. Conversely, if program that is being
compiled in a strictly conforming mode includes a header like
`<libumem.h>` or `<libnvpair.h>` then we do not need to do anything
special here because they are not a part of the standard.

In general, when we are building software in illumos, we are not
building in a strictly conforming manner. This means that we end up
having to use the `gnu` variants with compilers like `gcc`.

Finally, it's worth noting that specific versions of POSIX end up tying
to specific version of the C language. For example, POSIX 2024 is tied
to C17, where as older versions of the specification might expect C99.
Ultimately, illumos does not force the requirement that an application
building against a specific version of POSIX uses the corresponding C
language version. In practice, this is something where things shift
around and it's important that we retain flexibility for third-party
software.

=== Standards Impact in illumos

The standard that's chosen changes how software is built and what
language features are available. In general the choices here are
internal to illumos, but there are a few cases where this isn't the case
and therefore it's important to call out and understand them:

. Public Headers
. Libraries tied into the "values" files

Let's go into each of these in turn.

==== Public Headers

Let's start with public headers, as this is a more straightforward case
to understand. Many headers have a long and storied history in illumos.
This is particularly the case with things that have formed long-term
stable interfaces. Examples of these include things like C and POSIX
headers, libraries that have existed for quite some time, and kernel
headers that are part of the DDI.

While compilers have changed the default C version that they use, there
is a long history here and therefore special care has to be taken before
using features from outside of C89 in these headers. Even using a C99
flexible array member can suddenly cause software to no longer compile.
While C23 is out, not all of its features are supported and most
software will not build with it, so using a `_BitInt` is going to cause
almost all software grief.

This is not a blanket ban. Some features can still be used with the
proper guards; however, care needs to be taken. If you're uncertain,
please consult with the core team. Note, for internal headers and new
libraries, this constraint doesn't hold; however, some features should
be thought of as viral. For example, if you use a flexible array member,
all consumers must build at least on C99. These days, that's fairly
reasonable. However, it may be a different story with C23 (today in
2024). Related, if this is intended to support third-party software,
then it's important not to cut them off and be as flexible as possible.

Ultimately, with public headers there are shades of grey. Please consult
the core team if you have questions while working in here.

==== Libraries and Values Files

The C language has changed its defaults and what is supported since C89.
For example, C23 requires some functions treat `0b` as a prefix for a
binary number much like `0x` is used for hexadecimal. But this was not
present in the past. In other cases, these choices have much more
impact. While in many circumstances there are cases where we have used a
`#pragma redefine_extname` to select between multiple different
implementations that tie to the C standard, for some pieces, the
compiler will explicitly link in a "values" file such as `values-xpg4.o`
or `values-xpg6.o` which can be found in
https://github.com/illumos/illumos-gate/tree/master/usr/src/lib/crt/common[usr/src/lib/crt/common].

These values files define symbols that change the behavior of software
and select between different sets of behaviors. If we were to build libc
and libm in such a way as to link these in, then that would make it
impossible for users to get the behavior that they themselves explicitly
requested.

As such, these are places that you cannot use language features or
change CSTD arbitrarily.

=== Selecting a C Standard

Today, one selects a C standard by setting the `CSTD` macro in a
corresponding Makefile. If no standard is specified, then
`Makefile.master` will set the default to the equivalent of `gnu89`.
Currently, the kernel is all built with a consistent C standard in `Makefile.uts`
and this is not overridden. Unlike the kernel, libraries and commands
must individually opt into a new C standard. Today, a minority of
commands and libraries opt into these; however, of those that have been
added recently, most do.

There are a few challenges with this system as it stands today. The
biggest is that if you make a typo and use a macro that is not valid,
then you will end up building something without an explicit `-std=` flag
specified. When this happens, the C compiler will use whatever it likes
for its default, which changes with major versions of the compiler. This
means that folks switching between the supported compilers are in for a
rude surprise and further complicates the process for upgrading the
compiler.

== `cw` changes

Based on experiences where we've had software building with an
unexpected C version, we will modify `cw`, the compiler wrapper, to
specifically require a C version has been explicitly requested via a
`-std=` style flag. `cw` will not enforce the validity of this flag,
merely that it is present.

At this time, we will not change `cw` to do the same for C++. That is
left as possible future work.

As part of this, all software that was incorrectly specifying a C
standard version will be locked in at the current one that it is using.
The default of gcc 10.x, our primary as of this writing, is gnu17.

== Adopting C17

We concretely propose that we set C17 as our target language and XXX: target standard?
specifically use the `-std=gnu17` variant. Note, that per existing
policy this does not mean using every feature of C17 or every GNU
extension. See <<sec-lang>> for more information.

Today software is using a combination of either C89 or C99. We opt to
jump to C17 for a few reasons. In an ideal world, we would be able to
start using C23 right away. There are numerous features of the language
that are beneficial such as digit separators, binary prefixes, arbitrary
width Bit integers, the ability to specify enumeration sizes, better
zero initialization syntax that takes care of padding, etc.
Unfortunately, it is still a bit too early for us to jump to C23 for
several reasons:

* gcc 10, our current primary compiler, had very limited support for
C23 and uses a different flag for it, `-std=c2x`.
* gcc 14, our current shadow compiler, does support `-std=c23`;
however, it does not use the proper value for `__STDC_VERSION__` and
does not have full attribute support. It was released before the
specification was finished. With the inability to specify the proper
value for `__STDC_VERSION__` that means that you cannot opt into C23
features in headers.
* Our headers do not currently support some of the features required
for C23, which is an area of ongoing work. For example, some items like
`bool` are now keywords and therefore the existing `<stdbool.h>` header
needs changes to work in C23.

When it comes to C11 versus C17, C17 is effectively a cleaned up version
of C11 and therefore we see that there's no reason not to prefer C17.
There isn't much that going back would buy us. In particular, while we
propose adding C17 support in the Makefiles and suggesting that new
software explicitly select this as a C standard in its Makefiles, we
will not add macros for C11.

So really, this comes down to why C17 versus C89 or C99. In general,
there are newer language features that we would like to take advantage
as a project over time. We can see this by how most new software in
illumos uses C99, to get access to the `bool` type or to flexible array
members. There are many features where we rely on the fact that the
compiler is already exposing them in older environments. For example,
`_Static_Assert` is technically only valid in C11, but we can get away
with using it for `CTASSERT` due to how gcc operates and the fact that
the `CTASSERT` macro is private to illumos.

We do not see C17 as a stopping point, but rather the current local
maximum. Continuing to move forward and being in a position to adopt
better language features ultimately helps the project.

== Adopting a new C Standard for illumos

To consider adopting a new C standard for the project, there are several
things that need to be considered:

. Both our primary and shadow compilers need to have full support for
the language.
. Any linters or other tools, such as `smatch` need to have sufficient
support for the language. Note, this covers baseline language support.
This is also a factor in <<sec-lang>>.
. Our headers and library need to cover a sufficient portion of the
specification. Give the need to have both the primary and all shadow
compilers in good shape, this usually will already be in okay shape. It
is up to the core team to make a final call on what else is missing
here.
. We need to ensure that adoption of the newer language as a baseline
(regardless of features) does not hinder our ability to debug the
software.

[[sec-lang]]
== Adopting New C Language Features

Just because we adopt a new version of the C language does not mean that
all language level features in it are fair game. The same is not true
for library features, which we generally strive to make available in all
standards modes, unless there is a specific language feature tied to it.

Broadly speaking, the language features that we use and how they
interact in the broader system are all present in
https://illumos.org/man/7/style.7[style(7)]. Before adopting a new
language feature, discuss with the core team. In particular, aspects
that folks are looking for when adopting features are:

* Is the feature part of the standard, or is it specific to a single
  compiler? In general, we aim to avoid the latter.
* What is the relative utility of this feature? Does it provide notable
  quality of life improvements?
* What is the impact on debugability? Taking advantage of new features,
  but not being able to debug software that uses them like we can is a
  major challenge. Broadly speaking, illumos values the debugability of
  our software, whether that be through things like the /proc tools,
  DTrace, mdb, core files, and numerous other technologies.
* What is the impact on maintainability and readability? Code in illumos
  is read many more times than it is written. Being able to have a
  maintainable code base that can be understood by both newcomers and
  veterans alike is important to us.

Ultimately, for some things this may be straightforward, while others
will have tradeoffs. It's important to get different perspectives, but
please keep in mind that some of the answers to this may be subjective
and different individuals will weigh the answers to these questions
differently.

== When to Adjust the C Standard for Existing Software

While this IPD suggests what to do for new software, existing software is
a bit more complicated.

Our rule of thumb is that if you need a new feature, then that is a good
reason to change the C standard. In such cases, that does mean that the
testing burden will be somewhat higher as changing the C version can
cause the compiler to build things in different ways. Folding that as
part of broader functional testing is reasonable.

If this is not being driven based on need, then equal care still needs
to be taken. While opinions can vary on the utility in these cases,
changes will still be accepted as long as the testing burden is met.  If
changing it can be done in a
https://illumos.org/man/1ONBLD/wsdiff[wsdiff] clean way, then that is
good.  Otherwise, then broad functional testing is required to validate
that there are no regressions that are introduced by this. While some
software has regression testing in `usr/src/test` as part of various
test suites, this may often be insufficient. If in doubt, please reach
out to a core team member.

The kernel represents a particularly tricky case here due to the fact
that a single C standard is used across the board there. As additional
features, particularly starting with C23, become more relevant for
kernel development, we will figure out what a transition plan looks
like. This may involve allowing individual modules to build at a
different standard or another approach depending on what the impact from
wsdiff and related shows.

At the end of the day, the specifics of what's being changed, the
benefits, the risk, and related will be what's important.

== Project Plan

The project plan as it stands is fairly minimal as the majority of this
IPD is about project policy. It proposes changes that will:

* Enforce that `cw` will require a C standard for C based software.
* Introduce new Makefile symbols for the GNU variant of C17.
** Software that is using erroneous `CSTD` macros will be set at the
current version they are using.

While there are several things that we could explore around how to
improve new software getting the current target C version or changing
the C standard used for the kernel they are not a concrete part of this
proposal and are left to future investigation and proposals.
